# Data-Oriented Design

Data-oriented design has been around for decades in one form or another but was only officially given a name by Noel Llopis in his September 2009 article\[\#!NoelDOD!\#\] of the same name. Whether it is, or is not a programming paradigm is seen as contentious. Many believe it can be used side by side with other programming paradigms such as object-oriented, procedural, or functional programming. In one respect they are right, data-oriented design can function alongside the other paradigms, but that does not preclude it from being a way to approach programming in the large. Other programming paradigms are known to function alongside each other to some extent as well. A Lisp programmer knows that functional programming can coexist with object-oriented programming and a C programmer is well aware that object-oriented programming can coexist with procedural programming. We shall ignore these comments and claim data-oriented design as another important tool; a tool just as capable of coexistence as the rest. [1.1](https://www.dataorienteddesign.com/dodbook/footnode.html#foot215)

The time was right in 2009. The hardware was ripe for a change in how to develop. Potentially very fast computers were hindered by a hardware ignorant programming paradigm. The way game programmers coded at the time made many engine programmers weep. The times have changed. Many mobile and desktop solutions now seem to need the data-oriented design approach less, not because the machines are better at mitigating an ineffective approach, but the games being designed are less demanding and less complex. The trend for mobile seems to be moving to AAA development, which should bring the return of a need for managing complexity and getting the most out of the hardware.

As we now live in a world where multi-core machines include the ones in our pockets, learning how to develop software in a less serial manner is important. Moving away from objects messaging and getting responses immediately is part of the benefits available to the data-oriented programmer. Programming, with a firm reliance on awareness of the data flow, sets you up to take the next step to GPGPU and other compute approaches. This leads to handling the workloads that bring game titles to life. The need for data-oriented design will only grow. It will grow because abstractions and serial thinking will be the bottleneck of your competitors, and those that embrace the data-oriented approach will thrive.

